---
layout: post
title: "UMass CTF 2024"
date: 2024-04-22 16:30:00 +0000
categories: security
tags: ctf
---

This is the third times I write challenge for UMassCTF.
This year, I bring 3 rev challenges plus 1 miscs.
In the following sections, I will comment and show solution
for each challenge in the order of number of solves.
Be sure to try the challenge first before reading.

## \[miscs\] Agent P

### Description

-   Final points: 449
-   Solves: 37

Patrick sees secret, he puts it into computer immediately. But can you read the flag?

Files:
- secret.tar.gz

### Comment

Originally, this challenge does not have a name. When the CTF is starting to
get themed, I decided to go with _Agent P_, which uses the initial letter
of Patrick.

Like the name, I did not engineer this challenge too hard
and went with giving player a single line of encoded text. If during 
testing it was said to be easy, I would have racked up the challenge
difficulty by making a python server to serve encoded text and expect
correctly decoded result from player before returning the flag.
I finalized the challenge by making sure each character has a clear
mapping.
Compressed using `tar` gunzip under user _p_ and tabs at the beginning
are completely unrelated stuff in solving.

Surprisingly still, it became a survey of computer users in the CTF and has the highest points within misc category.

### Solution

With the given sequence of character, we plot them on ANSI QWERTY keyboard layout (US).
You may search online for an example of the layout,
or look down if you happen to use a compatible layout.

## \[rev\] Fructose

### Description

-   Final points: 454
-   Solves: 35

Every once in a while, it is good to have fruit.

Files:
- fructose.zip

### Comment

It starts out with a realization that Ghidra decompiler would
regard push before `ret` as dead code and ignore it.
At the same time, I was learning about x86 ROP chain,
and immediately I combine both ideas into a challenge.

Here are the cool stuff I have done when making this challenge:
1.  `push rax; ret`.
    The `ret` instruction basically pop the top of the stack and
    jump to it, so here we use `push rax` to slip in the address
    we want to go to. When opened in Ghidra,
    this part would be marked as dead code and nothing will show up.
    You can certainly use any other volatile register instead of
    just `rax`.
2.  Disturbing bytes. Commonly, the disassembler
    assumes x86 code to be lined up consecutively,
    meaning the following bytes after an instruction should also
    construct another instruction. Adding one or two 
    bytes before a jump target and the assembler will fail to decode original instruction.
3.  String and data in `.text`. Why not? Apparently, this is not
    limited to x86. Any von Neumann architecture should be able to
    pull the same trick.
4.  Hybrid bytes.
    The format string prefix `%` is represented by byte 0x25,
    which is also the opcode for AND instruction in x86.
    Adding 4 more bytes and this turns into `and eax, imm32`.
    It does not affect overall program just like junk instructions,
    but it can also be used as a proper format string. Certainly,
    this trick is not limited to `%`. And this method is also used
    in an inverse way to fake some string to look like actual
    instructions.
5.  Incremental switch table. Instead of having different jump targets
    that each has `ret` at the end, I merge all of them into one.
    Knowing the differences between targets for my challenge is
    the adding amount, I convert them into a series of `inc eax`,
    then set the proper jump target.
6.  Address compacting. The simplest way to build a jump table is to
    store addresses in an array, which compiler will do by default
    for switch statement (in some optimizations).
    However, our jump targets are small and close together,
    so we do not need to store full 64-bit addresses. Here I manually cut the address in half and store the offset into a table, then use a register as the base. Since memory addressing syntax in x86 includes base and offset already, implementing this is nothing but convenient.
    This is inspired by pointer compression in Chrome V8.
7.  `call` instruction (E8). If you simply think `call` as a branch
    instruction with `push rip`, there are many fancy ways you can
    play around. Beyond this challenge, you may also use it as a way to retrieve current rip (PC).
8.  `loop` instruction (E2) and `jrcxz` instruction (E3). These are
    convenient instructions for looping and branching without relying
    on flag register. Both depends on the condition `rcx == 0`.
    The `rep` (Repeat String Operation Prefix) has the same property,
    but I was not able to put it cleanly in this challenge.
    And I am curious why these would exist in x86.
9.  Fake conditional branch. Instead of always branching by using `jmp`,
    we can slightly reduce the reliability by using a conditional branch
    with a condition that has a significant high probabiliity.
10. `int3`. This is normally how a debugger set breakpoint:
    inserting this instruction right before where you set breakpoint. 
    If you are already developing on x86 assembly, you can just directly
    insert `int3` to set breakpoint and it would be caught by debugger.

The given executable is written in x86-64 assembly, compiled using
Netwide Assembler, linked using LLVM lld, and targeting Windows 64-bit.
The repo for the challenge is public at [dungwinux/fructose](https://github.com/dungwinux/fructose).

In the CTF, this is my most well-received challenge.
Unfortunately, a player spotted an unintended solution.
As it is pretty obvious, I would not explain in details here.

### Solution

Key ideas to look up in the binary: ROP, jump into middle of the instruction

There are 3 stages:
-   Stage 1: main uses `push rax` to go to next function
-   Stage 2: First half of the function is hidden using useless bytes. You may need to manually fix the disassembly view in the debugger/disassembler/RE tool.
-   Stage 3: Here are ROP table that maps input string using `inc`, and a function that accumulates using `xor`, `add` and compares the result with stored data.

Following the correct control flow, we should see a series of character checks.
Reverse each of the check, we shall recover the whole flag.

A quick way to go through most of these stage is to run this through a debugger
(WinDbg or x64dbg) and set a breakpoint properly after the ROP table
(slowly stepping through each instruction is also possible to reach this place).
We should see each check as the program popping function address
after function address from the stack.

## \[rev\] Maltodextrin

### Description

-   Final points: 491
-   Solves: 16

Maltodextrin is popular; I wish this one can be popular too.

Files:

-   maltodextrin.zip

### Comment

I never expressed this on the blog before, but this is the ISA
I love the second most.

Since people are already familiar with x86 and arm assembly,
plus the fact that LLM is being used extensively, I felt the
need to introduce something different but at core still requiring
the skill of reading assembly. That is why IA-64 become part
of the challenge.

I did some research and found no active disassemblers for this
architecture except for one:
[yaxpeax-dis](https://git.iximeow.net/yaxpeax-arch/about/).
No decompilers I found can accept this architecture, so I choose
to deliver an assembly file of C code compiled to Itanium instead of
a binary.
In order to do this, I install VS 2010, which is the last version to include an Itanium compiler.

To scale down the difficulty of reading this oddball ISA,
I wrote the C++ program to be very simple and used some patterns to
make the generated assembly easier to guess such as parallelable code. 
The assembly listing by `cl.exe` also added a bunch of helpful comments 
highlighting constants and symbols.
Since the source code is very simple, I will include it below. It is amazing to see how the compiler parallelize this for Itanium.
You should notice the significant amount of `nop` instructions in
the challenge.

```c++
#include "stdafx.h"
#define SIZE 100

int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
	unsigned char result[] = {
		0x4c,0xb3,0x58,0xad,0x4a,0x85,0x4d,0x96,0x28,0x8d,0x46,0xcf,
		0x77,0x8d,0x6d,0x8c,0x6c,0x9d,0x6d,0xcf,0x29,0x90,0x46,0xad,
		0x2a,0x8a,0x46,0xbf,0x6b,0x9d,0x71,0xcf,0x6d,0xcd,0x7a,0x8a,
		0x6c,0x8c,0x2a,0xa1,0x28,0x8d,0x46,0xcd,0x49,0xcf,0x5a,0x83,
	};
	char c[SIZE];
	puts("Enter the secret code");
	scanf("%100s", c);
	for (unsigned long long i = 0; i < SIZE; i += 2) {
		c[i] ^= 0x19;
		c[i + 1] ^= 0xFE;
	}
	puts(strncmp(c, (char*)result,
		sizeof(result)/sizeof(result[0])) ? "Wrong" : "Correct");

	return 0;
}
```

A funny thing I realized when compiling this challenge is that this old compiler
has already acknowledged the bad `scanf` and recommends `scanf_s`
instead, which I originally thought to be a recent thing.

```
1>ClCompile:
1>  All outputs are up-to-date.
1>  maltodextrin.cpp
1>maltodextrin.cpp(14): warning C4996: 'scanf': This function or variable may be unsafe. Consider using scanf_s instead. To disable deprecation, use _CRT_SECURE_NO_WARNINGS. See online help for details.
1>          C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio 10.0\VC\include\stdio.h(304) : see declaration of 'scanf'
```

### Solution

The first thing that must be observed is this is Itanium (IA-64).
Good references are [Intel manual](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/doc/manual/itanium-architecture-vol-1-2-3-4-reference-set-manual.pdf) 
and Raymond Chen's [The Old New Thing](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20150727-00/?p=90821). The later is recommended
if you would like to have good overall understanding of the architecture.

We should see that instructions are put into bundles of 3.
Near the end, we notice the loop described in three pack of instructions
(ends with `br` instructions, and each instruction inside prefixed with predicate `pxx`).
The loop contains two different `xor` instructions.
Before the loop, we see a lot of interleaving `mov` and `nop` instructions,
then a lot of `st1` (store 1 byte, pp. 1150 vol. 3). After the loop, we 
can also see the `strlen` function is being called
(through register `r27` and `b7`).

An educated guess for this part would be xoring the bytes before the loop,
and it should reveal the bytes because applying xor twice on plain text is known
to return the original input. The other thing we need to figure is the order.
A complicate way to understand this part is matching each `mov` with `st1` and
to know the idea of [_rotating registers_](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20150807-00/?p=91151).

It also happens that the plain text is ASCII, the XOR key size is divisble by 2,
and the odd and even byte of the key have different significant bit,
so we can simply list
all negative ones and positive ones to have two interleaving parts of the flag.
Eventually, XOR-ing in proper order shall give the flag.

## \[rev\] Aspartame

### Description

-   Final points: 495
-   Solves: 13

Just because you can, doesn't mean you should.

Files:
- aspartame.zip

#### Hint 1

There are two ways to run the challenge.

1. Boot the game by having a FAT32-formatted USB, then at the root of the storage adding the file to `efi/boot/bootx64.efi`.
2. Run using [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/download/). Download [OVMF prebuilt](https://www.kraxel.org/repos/jenkins/edk2/edk2.git-ovmf-x64-0-20220719.209.gf0064ac3af.EOL.no.nore.updates.noarch.rpm) and extract _OVMF-pure-efi.fd_ from the archive under path `.\usr\share\edk2.git\ovmf-x64\`. You can then start the game by executing:

`qemu-system-x86_64 -m 256M -bios OVMF-pure-efi.fd -kernel bootx64.efi`

#### Hint 2

You should try winning the game.

### Comment

Initially, my idea was to integrate C# into a rev/pwn challenge when
I see that dotnet from version 7 can now compile into native code.
I had a working example of a buffer overflow, which you might be able
to glimpse in the early commit of the repo.

Then I see an experimental compiler called
[bflat](https://github.com/bflattened/bflat) built on top of dotnet
was able to debloat many part of the C# library and target UEFI.
There is an example of [a 3D game running in UEFI](https://migeel.sk/blog/2023/12/08/building-bare-metal-bootable-game-for-raspberry-pi-in-csharp/).
I was requested to make the challenge easier this year, so I decided
at the end to make an UEFI reversing challenge.

To make the idea original, using bflat I implemented a new game: Tetris.
Honestly, C# is such an easy language to script game, to the extent
I was able to get rendering of game boards and all tetrominos up
within just a day. A simple rotation system is added as well.
Then [*@atch2203*](https://github.com/atch2203) - a fresh member of
UMass Cybersecurity Club and a tetris lover - saw it and offered to
help adding [SRS](https://tetris.wiki/Super_Rotation_System) to this
tetris game.
Kudos to him because the game control became much smoother after.
His contribution accounts at least 50% of the gameplay in the challenge.
He also presents a plausible solution if you choose to play the game
instead of reversing everything.

During the development, we learned how limited this environment is.
On real machine, there are no indications of error other than freeze.
GC does not exist, so all `new` calls are just plain memory allocation.
The compiler was buggy too, where the compiler cannot properly handle
array initialized with zero-value. Our workaround was to use a different
unique number (`9`) and check for that number whenever we access that 
array.
Somehow, the zerolib provided by bflat defines `ConsoleKey.Escape`,
but the `ReadKey` function never reads it, so we have to patch the 
library to recognize `<Escape>` key along with many
[others](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/Apx_B_Console.html#efi-scan-codes-for-efi-simple-text-input-protocol)
(see `console_key.patch` in the repo).
This also makes me realize why at boot screen you only have keybinding
of keys mostly from function row.
If we had more time, we defintely would have hacked the compiler
to include more features we wanted.

The repo for the challenge is public at [dungwinux/Aspartame](https://github.com/dungwinux/Aspartame).

### Solution

First, reverse the binary to find out the winning condition.
Looking at the strings, we can find "You win" text in the game.
Locating the text references is quite annoying since the text is in 
UTF16LE and it is addressed as part of a struct.

Here we should see the condition before the win text is printed:
Drop at least 69 pieces and the game area does not have any line that 
contains tetrominos (basically, PC or Perfect Clear).

After knowing the fact, we can either play the game or reverse
the code after printing "You win".

If we reverse the code after "You win", we should see a while loop that read an array,
bitshift and print out one of three characters: `#`, `<space>`, and `\n`. Concatnating the output, we should see the QR code.

It is possible to play the game, since by observation, the random seed
is always the same so the tetromino sequences is deterministic.
The QR-encoded flag should be printed out on the screen.
See [pc solves.pdf](https://github.com/dungwinux/Aspartame/blob/2b400bd33d1e6439c1915a164acb7089a8d55f7c/PCsolutions/pc%20solves.pdf) by @atch2203 for one of the solutions.

## Conclusion

I hope you, the reader, enjoy wrestling with the challenges
and have fun reading on how they were made. While the infra
is not up to expected, these challenges are luckily unaffected
due to the nature of being static.
No guarantees on what I will write for the next UMassCTF,
but for certain I will see you in the next blog post.
